install
-------

Dune supports installing packages on the system, i.e., copying freshly built
artifacts from the workspace to the system. The ``install`` stanza takes three
pieces of information:

- The list of files or directories to install
- The package to attach these files. This field is optional if your project
  contains a single package.
- The section in which the files will be installed

For instance:

.. code::

   (install
    (files hello.txt)
    (section share)
    (package mypackage))

Indicate that the file ``hello.txt`` in the current directory is to be installed
in ``<prefix>/share/mypackage``.

The following sections are available:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Section
     - Target
     - Remarks
   * - ``lib``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/<pkgname>/``
     -
   * - ``lib_root``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/``
     -
   * - ``libexec``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/<pkgname>/``
     - executable bit is set
   * - ``libexec_root``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/``
     - executable bit is set
   * - ``bin``
     - ``<prefix>/bin/``
     - executable bit is set
   * - ``sbin``
     - ``<prefix>/sbin/``
     - executable bit is set
   * - ``toplevel``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/toplevel/``
     -
   * - ``share``
     - ``<prefix>/share/<pkgname>/``
     -
   * - ``share_root``
     - ``<prefix>/share/``
     -
   * - ``etc``
     - ``<prefix>/etc/<pkgname>/``
     -
   * - ``stublibs``
     - ``<prefix>/lib/stublibs/``
     - executable bit is set
   * - ``doc``
     - ``<prefix>/doc/<pkgname>/``
     -
   * - ``man``
     - ``<prefix>/man/manX/``
     - (see below)
   * - ``misc``
     - absolute destination
     - (see below)
   * - ``(site (<package> <site>))``
     - ``<site>`` directory of ``<package>``
     - (see below)

Additional remarks:

- For ``man``, the exact destination is inferred from the file extension. For
  example, ``foo.1`` is installed as ``<prefix>/man/man1/foo.1``.
- ``misc`` only works when using opam. In that case, the user will be prompted
  before installation. This mechanism is deprecated.
- In the case of ``(site)``, if the prefix isn't the same as the one used when installing ``<package>``, ``<package>`` won't find the files.

Normally, Dune uses the file's basename to determine the file's name once
installed; however, you can change that by using the form ``(<filename> as
<destination>)`` in the ``files`` field. For instance, to install a file
``mylib.el`` as ``<prefix>/emacs/site-lisp/mylib.el``, you must write the
following:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (section share_root)
     (files   (mylib.el as emacs/site-lisp/mylib.el)))

The mode of installed files is fully determined by the section they are
installed in. If the section above is documented as with the executable bit
set, they are installed with mode ``0o755`` (``rwxr-xr-x``); otherwise they are
installed with mode ``0o644`` (``rw-r--r--``).

Note that all files in the install stanza must be specified by relative paths
only. It is an error to specify files by absolute paths.

Also note that as of dune-lang 3.11 (i.e., ``(lang dune 3.11)`` in
``dune-project``) it is deprecated to use the ``as`` keyword to specify a
destination beginning with ``..``. Dune intends for files associated with a
package to only be installed under specific directories in the file system
implied by the installation section (e.g., ``share``, ``bin``, ``doc``, etc.)
and the package name. Starting destination paths with ``..`` allows packages to
install files to arbitrary locations on the file system. In 3.11, this behaviour
is still supported (as some projects may depend on it) but will generate a
warning and will be removed in a future version of Dune.

Including Files in the Install Stanza
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can include external files from the ``files`` and ``dirs`` fields of the
install stanza:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (files (include foo.sexp))
     (section share))

Here the file ``foo.sexp`` must contain a single S-expression list, whose
elements will be included in the list of files or directories to install. That
is, elements may be of the form:

- ``<filename>``
- ``(<filename> as <destination>)``
- ``(include <filename>)``

Included files may be generated by rules. Here is an example of a rule which
generates a file by listing all the files in a subdirectory ``resources``:

.. code:: dune

    (rule
     (deps (source_tree resources))
     (action
      (with-stdout-to foo.sexp
      (system "echo '(' resources/* ')'"))))

Globs in the Install Stanza
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can use globs to specify files to install by using the terms ``(glob_files
<glob>)`` and ``(glob_files_rec <glob>)`` inside the ``files`` field of the
install stanza (but not inside the ``dirs`` field). See the :ref:`glob <glob>`
for details of the glob syntax. The ``(glob_files <glob>)`` term will expand its
argument within a single directory, whereas the ``(glob_files_rec <glob>)`` term
will recursively expand its argument within all subdirectories.

For example:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (files
      (glob_files style/*.css)
      (glob_files_rec content/*.html))
     (section share))

This example will install:

- All files matching ``*.css`` in the ``style`` directory.

- All files matching ``*.html`` in the ``content`` directory, or any of its
  descendant subdirectories.

Note that the paths to files are preserved after installation. Suppose the
source directory contained the files ``style/foo.css`` and
``content/bar/baz.html``. The example above will place these files in
``share/<package>/style/foo.css`` and ``share/<package>/content/bar/baz.html``
respectively where ``<package>`` is the name of the package (ie.
``dune-project`` would contain ``(package (name <package>))``).

The ``with_prefix`` keyword can be used to change the destination path of files
matched by a glob, similar to the ``as`` keyword in the ``(files ...)`` field.
``with_prefix`` changes the prefix of a path before the component matched by the
``*`` to some new value. For example:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (files
      (glob_files (style/*.css with_prefix web/stylesheets))
      (glob_files_rec (content/*.html with_prefix web/documents)))
     (section share))

Continuing the example above, this would result in the source file at
``style/foo.css`` being installed to ``share/<package>/web/stylesheets/foo.css``
and ``content/bar/baz.html`` being installed to
``share/<package>/web/documents/bar/baz.html``. Note in the latter case
``with_prefix`` only replaced the ``content`` component of the path and not the
``bar`` component since since it replaces the prefix of the glob - not the
prefix of paths matching the glob.

Installing Globs from Parent Directories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The default treatment of paths in globs creates a complication where referring
to globs in a parent directory such as ``(glob_files ../*.txt)`` would attempt
to install the matched files outside the designated install directory. For
example writing:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (files (glob_files ../*.txt))
     (section share))

...would cause Dune to attempt to install the matching files to
``share/<package>/../``, ie. ``share`` where ``<package>`` is the name of the
package (i.e., ``dune-project`` would contain ``(package (name <package>))``).
This is probably not what the user intends, and installing files to relative
paths beginning with ``..`` is deprecated from version 3.11 of Dune and will
become an error in a future version.

The solution is to use ``with_prefix`` to replace the ``..`` with some other
path. For example:

.. code:: dune

    (install
     (files (glob_files (../*.txt with_prefix .)))
     (section share))

...would install the matched files to ``share/<package>/`` instead.

Handling of the .exe Extension on Windows
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Under Microsoft Windows, executables must be suffixed with ``.exe``. Dune tries
to ensure that executables are always installed with this extension on Windows.

More precisely, when installing a file via an ``(install ...)`` stanza, Dune
implicitly adds the ``.exe`` extension to the destination, if the source file
has extension ``.exe`` or ``.bc`` and if it's not already present

Installing Source Directories
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To install entire source directories, the ``source_tree`` field can be used:

.. code:: dune

   (install
    (section doc)
    (source_trees manual))

This example results in the contents of the ``manual`` directory being installed
under ``<prefix>/doc/<package>/manual/``.

As with ``(files ...)`` the destination can be changed with the ``as`` keyword.
For example if you want to install all the files in the ``manual`` directory
directly into ``<prefix>/doc/<package>/`` you can write:

.. code:: dune

   (install
    (section doc)
    (source_trees (manual as .)))

It's also possible to specify multiple directories:

.. code:: dune

   (install
    (section doc)
    (source_trees manual examples))

This would result in the local directories ``manual`` and ``examples`` being
installed to ``<prefix>/doc/<package>/manual/`` and
``<prefix>/doc/<package>/examples/`` respectively.

Unlike with ``(files ...)`` it is an error to begin the destination (the
right-hand side of ``as``) with ``..``. (This is because support for installing
source directories was added to Dune after destinations beginning with ``..``
were deprecated.)
