#########
 library
#########

The ``library`` stanza must be used to describe OCaml libraries. The
format of library stanzas is as follows:

.. code:: dune

   (library
    (name <library-name>)
    <optional-fields>)

``<library-name>`` is the real name of the library. It determines the
names of the archive files generated for the library as well as the
module name under which the library will be available, unless ``(wrapped
false)`` is used (see below). It must be a valid OCaml module name, but
it doesn't need to start with an uppercase letter.

For instance, the modules of a library named ``foo`` will be available
as ``Foo.XXX``, outside of ``foo`` itself; however, it is allowed to
write an explicit ``Foo`` module, which will be the library interface.
You are free to expose only the modules you want.

Please note: by default, libraries and other things that consume
OCaml/Reason modules only consume modules from the directory where the
stanza appear. In order to declare a multi-directory library, you need
to use the :doc:`include_subdirs` stanza.

``<optional-fields>`` are:

-  ``(public_name <name>)`` - the name under which the library can be
   referred as a dependency when it's not part of the current workspace,
   i.e., when it's installed. Without a ``(public_name ...)`` field, the
   library won't be installed by Dune. The public name must start with
   the package name it's part of and optionally followed by a dot, then
   anything else you want. The package name must also be one of the
   packages that Dune knows about, as determined by the logic described
   in :doc:`/reference/packages`.

-  ``(package <package>)`` installs a private library under the
   specified package. Such a library is now usable by public libraries
   defined in the same project. The Findlib name for this library will
   be ``<package>.__private__.<name>``; however, the library's interface
   will be hidden from consumers outside the project.

-  ``(synopsis <string>)`` should give a one-line description of the
   library. This is used by tools that list installed libraries

-  ``(modules <modules>)`` specifies what modules are part of the
   library. By default, Dune will use all the ``.ml/.re`` files in the
   same directory as the ``dune`` file. This includes ones present in
   the file system as well as ones generated by user rules. You can
   restrict this list by using a ``(modules <modules>)`` field.
   ``<modules>`` uses the :doc:`/reference/ordered-set-language`, where
   elements are module names and don't need to start with an uppercase
   letter. For instance, to exclude module ``Foo``, use ``(modules
   (:standard \ foo))``. Starting in Dune 3.13, one can also use special
   forms ``(:include <file>)`` and variables such as
   ``%{read-lines:<file>}`` in this field to customize the list of
   modules using Dune rules. The dependencies introduced in this way
   *must live in a different directory that the stanza making use of
   them*.

-  ``(libraries <library-dependencies>)`` specifies the library's
   dependencies. See :doc:`/reference/library-dependencies` for more
   details.

-  ``(wrapped <boolean>)`` specifies whether the library modules should
   be available only through the top-level library module, or if they
   should all be exposed at the top level. The default is ``true``, and
   it's highly recommended to keep it this way. Because OCaml top-level
   modules must all be unique when linking an executables, polluting the
   top-level namespace will make your library unusable with other
   libraries if there is a module name clash. This option is only
   intended for libraries that manually prefix all their modules by the
   library name and to ease porting of existing projects to Dune.

-  ``(wrapped (transition <message>))`` is the same as ``(wrapped
   true)``, except it will also generate unwrapped (not prefixed by the
   library name) modules to preserve compatibility. This is useful for
   libraries that would like to transition from ``(wrapped false)`` to
   ``(wrapped true)`` without breaking compatibility for users. The
   deprecation notices for the unwrapped modules will include
   ``<message>``.

-  ``(preprocess <preprocess-spec>)`` specifies how to preprocess files
   when needed. The default is ``no_preprocessing``, and other options
   are described in :doc:`/reference/preprocessing-spec`.

-  ``(preprocessor_deps (<deps-conf list>))`` specifies extra
   preprocessor dependencies preprocessor, i.e., if the preprocessor
   reads a generated file. The specification of dependencies is
   described in :doc:`/concepts/dependency-spec`.

-  ``(optional)`` - if present, it indicates that the library should
   only be built and installed if all the dependencies are available,
   either in the workspace or in the installed world. Use this to
   provide extra features without adding hard dependencies to your
   project

-  ``(foreign_stubs <foreign-stubs-spec>)`` specifies foreign source
   files, e.g., C or C++ stubs, to be compiled and packaged together
   with the library. See the section :doc:`/reference/foreign` for more
   details. This field replaces the now-deleted fields ``c_names``,
   ``c_flags``, ``cxx_names``, and ``cxx_flags``.

-  ``(foreign_archives <foreign-archives-list>)`` specifies archives of
   foreign object files to be packaged with the library. See the section
   :ref:`foreign-archives` for more details. This field replaces the
   now-deleted field ``self_build_stubs_archive``.

-  ``(install_c_headers (<names>))`` - if your library has public C
   header files that must be installed, you must list them in this
   field, without the ``.h`` extension. You should favor the
   ``public_headers`` field starting from 3.8.

-  ``(public_headers (<files>))`` - if your library has public C header
   files that must be installed, you must list them in this field. This
   field accepts globs in the form of ``(glob_files_rec <glob>)`` and
   ``(glob_files <glob>)`` fields to specify multiple files.

   The advantage of this field over ``install_c_headers`` is that it
   preserves the directory structures of the headers relative to the
   library stanza. Additionally, it allows to specify the extensions of
   the header files, which allows alternative extensions such as ``.hh``
   or ``.hpp``.

-  ``(modes <modes>)`` is for modes which should be built by default.
   The most common use for this feature is to disable native compilation
   when writing libraries for the OCaml toplevel. The following modes
   are available: ``byte``, ``native`` and ``best``. ``best`` is
   ``native`` or ``byte`` when native compilation isn't available.

-  ``(no_dynlink)`` disables dynamic linking of the library. This is for
   advanced use only. By default, you shouldn't set this option.

-  ``(kind <kind>)`` sets the type of library. The default is
   ``normal``, but other available choices are ``ppx_rewriter`` and
   ``ppx_deriver``. They must be set when the library is intended to be
   used as a PPX rewriter or a ``[@@deriving ...]`` plugin. The reason
   ``ppx_rewriter`` and ``ppx_deriver`` are split is historical, and
   hopefully we won't need two options soon. Both PPX kinds support an
   optional field: ``(cookies <cookies>)``, where ``<cookies>`` is a
   list of pairs ``(<name> <value>)`` with ``<name>`` being the cookie
   name and ``<value>`` a string that supports
   :doc:`/concepts/variables` evaluated by each preprocessor invocation
   (note: libraries that share cookies with the same name should agree
   on their expanded value).

-  ``(ppx_runtime_libraries (<library-names>))`` is for when the library
   is a ``ppx rewriter`` or a ``[@@deriving ...]`` plugin, and has
   runtime dependencies. You need to specify these runtime dependencies
   here.

-  ``(virtual_deps (<opam-packages>)``. Sometimes opam packages enable a
   specific feature only if another package is installed. For instance,
   the case of ``ctypes`` will only install ``ctypes.foreign`` if the
   dummy ``ctypes-foreign`` package is installed. You can specify such
   virtual dependencies here, but you don't need to do so unless you use
   Dune to synthesize the ``depends`` and ``depopts`` sections of your
   opam file.

-  ``js_of_ocaml`` sets options for JavaScript compilation, see
   :ref:`jsoo-field`.

-  For ``flags``, ``ocamlc_flags``, and ``ocamlopt_flags``, see
   :doc:`/concepts/ocaml-flags`.

-  ``(library_flags (<flags>))`` is a list of flags passed to ``ocamlc``
   and ``ocamlopt`` when building the library archive files. You can use
   this to specify ``-linkall``, for instance. ``<flags>`` is a list of
   strings supporting :doc:`/concepts/variables`.

-  ``(c_library_flags <flags>)`` specifies the flags passed to the C
   compiler when constructing the library archive file for the C stubs.
   ``<flags>`` uses the :doc:`/reference/ordered-set-language` and
   supports ``(:include ...)`` forms. When you write bindings for a C
   library named ``bar``, you should typically write ``-lbar`` here, or
   whatever flags are necessary to link against this library.

-  ``(modules_without_implementation <modules>)`` specifies a list of
   modules that have only a ``.mli`` or ``.rei`` but no ``.ml`` or
   ``.re`` file. Such modules are usually referred as *mli only
   modules*. They are not officially supported by the OCaml compiler;
   however, they are commonly used. Such modules must only define types.
   Since it isn't reasonably possible for Dune to check this is the
   case, Dune requires the user to explicitly list such modules to avoid
   surprises. Note that the ``modules_without_implementation`` field
   isn't merged in ``modules``, which represents the total set of
   modules in a library. If a directory has more than one stanza, and
   thus a ``modules`` field must be specified, ``<modules>`` still needs
   to be added in ``modules``.

-  ``(private_modules <modules>)`` specifies a list of modules that will
   be marked as private. Private modules are inaccessible from outside
   the libraries they are defined in. Note that the ``private_modules``
   field is not merged in ``modules``, which represents the total set of
   modules in a library. If a directory has more than one stanza and
   thus a ``modules`` field must be specified, ``<modules>`` still need
   to be added in ``modules``.

-  ``(allow_overlapping_dependencies)`` allows external dependencies to
   overlap with libraries that are present in the workspace.

-  ``(enabled_if <blang expression>)`` conditionally disables a library.
   A disabled library cannot be built and will not be installed. The
   condition is specified using the :doc:`/reference/boolean-language`,
   and the field allows for the ``%{os_type}`` variable, which is
   expanded to the type of OS being targeted by the current build. Its
   value is the same as the value of the ``os_type`` parameter in the
   output of ``ocamlc -config``.

-  ``(inline_tests)`` enables inline tests for this library. They can be
   configured through options using ``(inline_tests <options>)``. See
   :ref:`inline_tests` for a reference of corresponding options.

-  ``(root_module <module>)`` this field instructs Dune to generate a
   module that will contain module aliases for every library specified
   in dependencies. This is useful whenever a library is shadowed by a
   local module. The library may then still be accessible via this root
   module

-  ``(ctypes <ctypes field>)`` instructs Dune to use ctypes stubgen to
   process your type and function descriptions for binding system
   libraries, vendored libraries, or other foreign code. See
   :ref:`ctypes-stubgen` for a full reference. This field is available
   since the 3.0 version of the Dune language.

-  ``(empty_module_interface_if_absent)`` causes the generation of empty
   interfaces for every module that does not have an interface file
   already. Useful when modules are used solely for their side-effects.
   This field is available since the 3.0 version of the Dune language.

Note that when binding C libraries, Dune doesn't provide special support
for tools such as ``pkg-config``; however, it integrates easily with
:ref:`configurator` by using ``(c_flags (:include ...))`` and
``(c_library_flags (:include ...))``.
