########
 menhir
########

A ``menhir`` stanza is available to support the Menhir parser generator.

To use Menhir in a Dune project, the language version should be selected
in the ``dune-project`` file. For example:

.. code:: dune

   (using menhir 2.0)

This will enable support for Menhir stanzas in the current project. If
the language version is absent, Dune will automatically add this line
with the latest Menhir version once a Menhir stanza is used anywhere.

The basic form for defining menhir-git_ parsers (analogous to
:doc:`ocamlyacc`) is:

.. code:: dune

   (menhir
    (modules <parser1> <parser2> ...)
    <optional-fields>)

``<optional-fields>`` are:

-  ``(merge_into <base_name>)`` is used to define modular parsers. This
   correspond to the ``--base`` command line option of ``menhir``. With
   this option, a single parser named ``base_name`` is generated.

-  ``(flags <option1> <option2> ...)`` is used to pass extra flags to
   Menhir.

-  ``(infer <bool>)`` is used to enable Menhir with type inference. This
   option is enabled by default with Menhir language 2.0.

Menhir supports writing the grammar and automation to the ``.cmly``
file. Therefore, if this is flag is passed to Menhir, Dune will know to
introduce a ``.cmly`` target for the module.

-  ``(explain <blang expression>)`` is used to control the generation of
   the ``.conflicts`` file explaining conflicts found while generating
   the parser. The condition is specified using the
   :doc:`/reference/boolean-language`. This field was introduced in
   version 3.0 of the Menhir extension.

Note that starting in version 3.0 of the Menhir extension, the
``.conflicts`` file is generated by default. If this is not desired, it
needs to be disabled explicitly by using the ``(explain)`` field.

.. _menhir-git: https://gitlab.inria.fr/fpottier/menhir
