######
 rule
######

The ``rule`` stanza is used to create custom user rules. It tells Dune
how to generate a specific set of files from a specific set of
dependencies.

The syntax is as follows:

.. code:: dune

   (rule
    (action <action>)
    <optional-fields>)

``<action>`` is what you run to produce the targets from the
dependencies. See :doc:`/reference/actions/index` for more details.

``<optional-fields>`` are:

-  ``(target <filename>)`` or ``(targets <filenames>) ``<filenames>`` is
   a list of filenames (if defined with ``targets``) or exactly one
   filename (if defined with ``target``). Dune needs to statically know
   targets of each rule. ``(targets)`` can be omitted if it can be
   inferred from the action. See `inferred rules`_.

-  ``(deps <deps-conf list>)`` specifies the dependencies of the rule.
   See :doc:`/concepts/dependency-spec` for more details.

-  ``(mode <mode>)`` specifies how to handle the targets. See modes_ for
   details.

-  ``(fallback)`` is deprecated and is the same as ``(mode fallback)``.

-  ``(locks (<lock-names>))`` specifies that the action must be run
   while holding the following locks. See :doc:`/concepts/locks` for
   more details.

-  ``(alias <alias-name>)`` specifies this rule's alias. Building this
   alias means building the targets of this rule.

-  ``(aliases <alias-name list>)`` specifies many aliases for this rule.

-  ``(package <package>)`` specifies this rule's package. This rule will
   be unavailable when installing other packages in release mode.

-  ``(enabled_if <blang expression>)`` specifies the Boolean condition
   that must be true for the rule to be considered. The condition is
   specified using the :doc:`/reference/boolean-language`, and the field
   allows for :doc:`/concepts/variables` to appear in the expressions.

Please note: contrary to makefiles or other build systems, user rules
currently don't support patterns, such as a rule to produce ``%.y`` from
``%.x`` for any given ``%``. This might be supported in the future.

.. _modes:

*******
 Modes
*******

By default, a rule's target must not exist in the source tree because
Dune will error out when this is the case; however, it's possible to
change this behavior using the ``mode`` field. The following modes are
available:

-  ``standard`` - the standard mode.

-  ``fallback`` - in this mode, when the targets are already present in
   the source tree, Dune will ignore the rule. It's an error if only a
   subset of the targets are present in the tree. Fallback rules are
   commonly used to generate default configuration files that may be
   generated by a configure script.

.. _promote:

-  ``promote`` or ``(promote <options>)`` - in this mode, the files in
   the source tree will be ignored. Once the rule has been executed, the
   targets will be copied back to the source tree. The following options
   are available:

   -  ``(until-clean)`` means that ``dune clean`` will remove the
      promoted files from the source tree.

   -  ``(into <dir>)`` means that the files are promoted in ``<dir>``
      instead of the current directory. This feature has been available
      since Dune 1.8.

   -  ``(only <predicate>)`` means that only a subset of the targets
      should be promoted. The argument is similar to the argument of
      :doc:`subdir`, specified using the
      :doc:`/reference/predicate-language`. This feature has been
      available since Dune 1.10.

There are two use cases for ``promote`` rules. The first one is when the
generated code is easier to review than the generator, so it's easier to
commit the generated code and review it. The second is to cut down
dependencies during releases. By passing ``--ignore-promoted-rules`` to
Dune, rules with ``(mode promote)`` will be ignored, and the source
files will be used instead. The ``-p/--for-release-of-packages`` flag
implies ``--ignore-promote-rules``. However, rules that promote only a
subset of their targets via ``(only ...)`` are never ignored.

****************
 Inferred Rules
****************

When using the action DSL (see :doc:`/reference/actions/index`), the
dependencies and targets are usually obvious.

For instance:

.. code:: dune

   (rule
    (target b)
    (deps   a)
    (action (copy %{deps} %{target})))

In this example, the dependencies and targets are obvious by inspecting
the action. When this is the case, you can use the following shorter
syntax and have Dune infer dependencies and targets for you:

.. code:: dune

   (rule <action>)

For instance:

.. code:: dune

   (rule (copy a b))

Note that in Dune, targets must always be known statically. For
instance, this ``(rule ...)`` stanza is rejected by Dune:

.. code:: dune

   (rule (copy a b.%{read:file}))

*******************
 Directory targets
*******************

Note that at this time, Dune officially only supports user rules with
targets in the current directory. However, starting from Dune 3.0, we
provide an experimental support for *directory targets*, where an action
can produce a whole tree of build artifacts. To specify a directory
target, you can use the ``(dir <dirname>)`` syntax. For example, the
following stanza describes a rule with a file target ``foo`` and a
directory target ``bar``.

.. code:: dune

   (rule
    (targets foo (dir bar))
    (action  <action>))

To enable this experimental feature, add ``(using directory-targets
0.1)`` to your ``dune-project`` file. However note that currently rules
with a directory target are always rebuilt. We are working on fixing
this performance bug.
