rule
----

The ``rule`` stanza is used to create custom user rules. It tells Dune how to
generate files from dependencies, or how to run an action when an alias is
requested.

The syntax is as follows:

.. code:: dune

    (rule
     (action <action>)
     <optional-fields>)

``<action>`` is what you run to produce the targets from the dependencies, or
to build the attached aliases. See :doc:`/reference/actions/index` for more
details.

A rule must either have at least one target or be attached to at least one
alias. Targets may be listed explicitly with ``target`` or ``targets``, or
inferred from the action. Alias-only rules are useful for commands that don't
produce files, such as benchmarks.

``<optional-fields>`` are:

- ``(target <filename>)`` or ``(targets <filenames>)`` is a list of filenames
  (if defined with ``targets``) or exactly one filename (if defined with
  ``target``). Dune needs to statically know file targets of each rule.
  ``(targets)`` can be omitted if it can be inferred from the action. See
  `inferred rules`_. It can also be omitted when the rule is only attached to
  an alias.

- ``(deps <deps-conf list>)`` specifies the dependencies of the rule. See
  :doc:`/concepts/dependency-spec` for more details.

- ``(mode <mode>)`` specifies how to handle the targets. See `modes`_ for
  details.

- ``(fallback)`` is deprecated and is the same as ``(mode fallback)``.

- ``(locks (<lock-names>))`` specifies that the action must be run while holding
  the following locks. See :doc:`/concepts/locks` for more details.

- ``(alias <alias-name>)`` specifies this rule's alias. If the rule has file
  targets, building this alias builds those targets. If the rule has no file
  targets, building this alias runs the rule's action.

- ``(aliases <alias-name list>)`` specifies many aliases for this rule.

- ``(package <package>)`` specifies this rule's package. This rule will be
  unavailable when installing other packages in release mode.

- ``(enabled_if <blang expression>)`` specifies the Boolean condition that must
  be true for the rule to be considered. The condition is specified using the
  :doc:`/reference/boolean-language`, and the field allows for
  :doc:`/concepts/variables` to appear in the expressions.

- ``(corrections <setting>)`` controls whether the rule's action may produce
  correction files that Dune reports as promotions. See `Corrections`_ for
  details. This field has been available since Dune 3.23.

Please note: contrary to makefiles or other build systems, user rules currently
don't support patterns, such as a rule to produce ``%.y`` from ``%.x`` for any
given ``%``. This might be supported in the future.

After a rule's action exits, Dune records the produced targets. It must be able
to read every target, including files inside directory targets. Dune also
removes write permissions from generated files in the build directory before
recording them. Actions may write their targets while they run, but generated
targets should be treated as immutable once the rule finishes.

.. _modes:

Modes
~~~~~

By default, a rule's target must not exist in the source tree because Dune will
error out when this is the case; however, it's possible to change this behavior
using the ``mode`` field. The following modes are available:

- ``standard`` - the standard mode.

- ``fallback`` - in this mode, when the targets are already present in the
  source tree, Dune will ignore the rule. It's an error if only a subset of the
  targets are present in the tree. Fallback rules are commonly used to generate
  default configuration files that may be generated by a configure script.

.. _promote:

- ``promote`` or ``(promote <options>)`` - in this mode, the files in the source
  tree will be ignored. Once the rule has been executed, the targets will be
  copied back to the source tree. The following options are available:

  - ``(until-clean)`` means that ``dune clean`` will remove the promoted files
    from the source tree.
  - ``(into <dir>)`` means that the files are promoted in ``<dir>`` instead of
    the current directory. This feature has been available since Dune 1.8.
  - ``(only <predicate>)`` means that only a subset of the targets should be
    promoted. The argument is similar to the argument of :doc:`subdir`,
    specified using the :doc:`/reference/predicate-language`.
    This feature has been available since Dune 1.10.

There are two use cases for ``promote`` rules. The first one is when the
generated code is easier to review than the generator, so it's easier to commit
the generated code and review it. The second is to cut down dependencies during
releases. By passing ``--ignore-promoted-rules`` to Dune, rules with ``(mode
promote)`` will be ignored, and the source files will be used instead. The
``-p/--for-release-of-packages`` flag implies ``--ignore-promote-rules``.
However, rules that promote only a subset of their targets via ``(only ...)``
are never ignored.

Corrections
~~~~~~~~~~~

Rules can opt in to correction discovery with the ``corrections`` field. This
is useful for custom tools that rewrite, format, lint, or otherwise suggest
updates to source files without using an explicit ``(diff? ...)`` action.

The field accepts the following settings:

- ``ignore`` is the default. Dune does not look for correction files produced by
  the rule.
- ``produce`` makes Dune run the action in a sandbox and, when the action
  finishes, scan the sandbox for files ending in ``.corrected``. A file named
  ``foo.corrected`` is treated as the corrected version of ``foo``. If the files
  differ, Dune prints a diff, fails the rule, and records a promotion from
  ``foo.corrected`` to ``foo``. The correction can then be applied with
  ``dune promote`` or ``dune runtest --auto-promote``. If the corrected file is
  identical to the source file, no promotion is recorded and the rule succeeds.

For example:

.. code:: dune

   (rule
    (alias runtest)
    (deps expected-output)
    (corrections produce)
    (action
     (run ./check-and-rewrite.exe expected-output expected-output.corrected)))

The same naming convention applies in subdirectories: ``subdir/foo.corrected``
is a correction for ``subdir/foo``. Correction files that are themselves
dependencies of the rule are ignored, so copied dependencies are not promoted by
accident.

``(corrections produce)`` cannot be combined with ``patch_back_source_tree``
sandboxing.

Inferred Rules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using the action DSL (see :doc:`/reference/actions/index`), the
dependencies and targets are usually obvious.

For instance:

.. code:: dune

    (rule
     (target b)
     (deps   a)
     (action (copy %{deps} %{target})))

In this example, the dependencies and targets are obvious by inspecting the
action. When this is the case, you can use the following shorter syntax and have
Dune infer dependencies and targets for you:

.. code:: dune

    (rule <action>)

For instance:

.. code:: dune

    (rule (copy a b))

Note that in Dune, targets must always be known statically. For instance, this
``(rule ...)`` stanza is rejected by Dune:

.. code:: dune

    (rule (copy a b.%{read:file}))

Directory targets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note that at this time, Dune officially only supports user rules with targets in
the current directory. Starting from Dune 3.24, Dune supports *directory
targets*, where an action can produce a whole tree of build artifacts. To
specify a directory target, you can use the ``(dir <dirname>)`` syntax. For
example, the following stanza describes a rule with a file target ``foo`` and a
directory target ``bar``.

.. code:: dune

    (rule
     (targets foo (dir bar))
     (action  <action>))

In Dune 3.0 through 3.23, directory targets require the experimental
``(using directory-targets 0.1)`` extension.
