.. _melange_main:

#####################################
 JavaScript Compilation With Melange
#####################################

**************
 Introduction
**************

`Melange <https://github.com/melange-re/melange>`_ compiles OCaml to
JavaScript. It produces one JavaScript file per OCaml module. Melange
can be installed with opam:

.. code:: console

   $ opam install melange

Dune can build projects using Melange, and it allows the user to produce
JavaScript files by defining a :ref:`melange-emit` stanza. Dune
libraries can be used with Melange by adding ``melange`` to ``(modes
...)`` in the :doc:`/reference/files/dune/library` stanza.

Melange support is still experimental in Dune and needs to be enabled in
the :doc:`/reference/files/dune-project/index` file:

.. code:: dune

   (using melange 0.1)

Once that's in place, you can use the Melange mode in
:doc:`/reference/files/dune/library` stanzas ``melange.emit`` stanzas.

****************
 Simple Project
****************

Let's start by looking at a simple project with Melange and Dune.
Subsequent sections explain the different concepts used here in further
detail.

First, make sure that the :doc:`/reference/files/dune-project/index`
file specifies at least version 3.8 of the Dune language, and the
Melange extension is enabled:

.. code:: dune

   (lang dune 3.14)
   (using melange 0.1)

Next, write a :doc:`/reference/files/dune/index` file with a
:ref:`melange-emit` stanza:

.. code:: dune

   (melange.emit
    (target output))

Finally, add a source file to build:

.. code:: console

   $ echo 'Js.log "hello from melange"' > hello.ml

After running ``dune build @melange`` or just ``dune build``, Dune
produces the following file structure:

.. code::

   .
   ├── _build
   │   └── default
   │       └── output
   │           └── hello.js
   ├── dune
   ├── dune-project
   └── hello.ml

The resulting JavaScript can now be run:

.. code:: console

   $ node _build/default/output/hello.js
   hello from melange

***********
 Libraries
***********

Adding Melange support to Dune libraries is done as follows:

-  ``(modes melange)``: adding ``melange`` to ``modes`` is required.
   This field also supports the :doc:`reference/ordered-set-language`.

-  ``(melange.runtime_deps <deps>)``: optionally, define any runtime
   dependencies using ``melange.runtime_deps``. This field is analog to
   the ``runtime_deps`` field used in ``melange.emit`` stanzas.

.. _melange-emit:

**************
 melange.emit
**************

.. versionadded:: 3.8

The ``melange.emit`` stanza allows the user to produce JavaScript files
from Melange libraries and entry-point modules. It's similar to the
OCaml :doc:`/reference/files/dune/executable` stanza, with the exception
that there is no linking step.

.. code:: dune

   (melange.emit
    (target <target>)
    <optional-fields>)

``<target>`` is the name of the folder where resulting JavaScript
artifacts will be placed. In particular, the folder will be placed under
``_build/default/$path-to-directory-of-melange-emit-stanza``.

The result of building a ``melange.emit`` stanza will match the file
structure of the source tree. For example, given the following source
tree:

.. code::

   ├── dune # (melange.emit (target output) (libraries lib))
   ├── app.ml
   └── lib
       ├── dune # (library (name lib) (modes melange))
       └── helper.ml

The resulting layout in ``_build/default/output`` will be as follows:

.. code::

   output
   ├── app.js
   └── lib
       ├── lib.js
       └── helper.js

``<optional-fields>`` are:

-  ``(alias <alias-name>)`` specifies an alias to which to attach the
   targets of the ``melange.emit`` stanza.

   -  These targets include the ``.js`` files generated by the stanza
      modules, the targets for the ``.js`` files of any library that the
      stanza depends on, and any copy rules for runtime dependencies
      (see ``runtime_deps`` field below).

   -  By default, all stanzas will have their targets attached to an
      alias ``melange``. The behavior of this default alias is
      exclusive: if an alias is explicitly defined in the stanza, the
      targets from this stanza will be excluded from the ``melange``
      alias.

   -  The targets of ``melange.emit`` are also attached to the Dune
      default alias (``@all``), regardless of whether the ``(alias
      ...)`` field is present.

-  ``(module_systems <module_systems>)`` specifies the JavaScript import
   and export format used. The values allowed for ``<module_systems>``
   are ``es6`` and ``commonjs``.

   -  ``es6`` will follow `JavaScript modules
      <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules>`_,
      and will produce ``import`` and ``export`` statements.

   -  ``commonjs`` will follow `CommonJS modules
      <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html>`_, and will produce
      `require` calls and export values with ``module.exports``.

   -  If no extension is specified, the resulting JavaScript files will
      use ``.js``. You can specify a different extension with a pair
      ``(<module_system> <extension>)``, e.g. ``(module_systems (es6
      mjs))``.

   -  Multiple module systems can be used in the same field as long as
      their extensions are different. For example, ``(module_systems
      commonjs (es6 mjs))`` will produce one set of JavaScript files
      using CommonJS and the ``.js`` extension, and another using ES6
      and the ``.mjs`` extension.

-  ``(modules <modules>)`` specifies what modules will be built with
   Melange. By default, if this field is not defined, Dune will use all
   the ``.ml/.re`` files in the same directory as the ``dune`` file.
   This includes module sources present in the file system as well as
   modules generated by user rules. You can restrict this list by using
   an explicit ``(modules <modules>)`` field. ``<modules>`` uses the
   :doc:`reference/ordered-set-language`, where elements are module
   names and don't need to start with an uppercase letter. For instance,
   to exclude module ``Foo``, use ``(modules :standard \ foo)``.

-  ``(libraries <library-dependencies>)`` specifies Melange library
   dependencies. Melange libraries can only use the simple form, like
   ``(libraries foo pkg.bar)``. Keep in mind the following limitations:

   -  The ``re_export`` form is not supported.

   -  All the libraries included in ``<library-dependencies>`` have to
      support the ``melange`` mode (see the section about libraries
      below).

-  ``(package <package>)`` allows the user to define the JavaScript
   package to which the artifacts produced by the ``melange.emit``
   stanza will belong.

-  ``(runtime_deps <paths-to-deps>)`` specifies dependencies that should
   be copied to the build folder together with the ``.js`` files
   generated from the sources. These runtime dependencies can include
   assets like CSS files, images, fonts, external JavaScript files, etc.
   ``runtime_deps`` adhere to the formats in
   :doc:`concepts/dependency-spec`. For example ``(runtime_deps
   ./path/to/file.css (glob_files_rec ./fonts/*))``.

-  ``(emit_stdlib <bool>)`` allows the user to specify whether the
   Melange standard library should be included as a dependency of the
   stanza or not. The default is ``true``. If this option is ``false``,
   the Melange standard library and runtime JavaScript files won't be
   produced in the target directory.

-  ``(promote <options>)`` promotes the generated ``.js`` files to the
   source tree. The options are the same as for the :ref:`rule promote
   mode <promote>`. Adding ``(promote (until-clean))`` to a
   ``melange.emit`` stanza will cause Dune to copy the ``.js`` files to
   the source tree and ``dune clean`` to delete them.

-  ``(preprocess <preprocess-spec>)`` specifies how to preprocess files
   when needed. The default is ``no_preprocessing``. Additional options
   are described in the :doc:`reference/preprocessing-spec` section.

-  ``(preprocessor_deps (<deps-conf list>))`` specifies extra
   preprocessor dependencies, e.g., if the preprocessor reads a
   generated file. The dependency specification is described in the
   :doc:`concepts/dependency-spec` section.

-  ``(compile_flags <flags>)`` specifies compilation flags specific to
   ``melc``, the main Melange executable. ``<flags>`` is described in
   detail in the :doc:`reference/ordered-set-language` section. It also
   supports ``(:include ...)`` forms. The value for this field can also
   be taken from ``env`` stanzas. It's therefore recommended to add
   flags with e.g. ``(compile_flags :standard <my options>)`` rather
   than replace them.

-  ``(root_module <module>)`` specifies a ``root_module`` that collects
   all listed dependencies in ``libraries``. See the documentation for
   ``root_module`` in the :doc:`/reference/files/dune/library` stanza.

-  ``(allow_overlapping_dependencies)`` is the same as the corresponding
   field of :doc:`/reference/files/dune/library`.

-  ``(enabled_if <blang expression>)`` conditionally disables a melange
   emit stanza. The JavaScript files associated with the stanza won't be
   built. The condition is specified using the
   :doc:`reference/boolean-language`.

***********************
 Recommended Practices
***********************

Keep Bundles Small by Reducing the Number of ``melange.emit`` Stanzas
=====================================================================

It is recommended to minimize the number of ``melange.emit`` stanzas
that a project defines: using multiple ``melange.emit`` stanzas will
cause multiple copies of the JavaScript files to be generated if the
same libraries are used across them. As an example:

.. code:: dune

   (melange.emit
    (target app1)
    (libraries foo))

   (melange.emit
    (target app2)
    (libraries foo))

The JavaScript artifacts for library ``foo`` will be emitted twice in
the ``_build`` folder. They will be present under
``_build/default/app1`` and ``_build/default/app2``.

This can have unexpected impact on bundle size when using tools like
Webpack or Esbuild, as these tools will not be able to see shared
library code as such, as it would be replicated across the paths of the
different stanzas ``target`` folders.

Faster Builds With ``subdir`` and ``dirs`` Stanzas
==================================================

Melange libraries might be installed from the ``npm`` package
repository, together with other JavaScript packages. To avoid having
Dune inspect unnecessary folders in ``node_modules``, it is recommended
to explicitly include only the folders that are relevant for Melange
builds.

This can be accomplished by combining
:doc:`/reference/files/dune/subdir` and
:doc:`/reference/files/dune/subdir` stanzas in a ``dune`` file next to
the ``node_modules`` folder. The
:doc:`/reference/files/dune/vendored_dirs` stanza can be used to avoid
warnings in Melange libraries during the application build. The
:doc:`/reference/files/dune/data_only_dirs` stanza can be useful as well
if you need to override the build rules in one of the packages.

.. code:: dune

   (subdir
    node_modules
    (vendored_dirs reason-react)
    (dirs reason-react))
